Once around formal
halt form halt is in the constellation
of the southern fish Pisces Ostrini and
is the brightest star. It's somewhat
difficult to observe from the northern
latitudes where I live, but you don't
have to go very far south before it
becomes above the horizon and visible.
So the name comes from the Arabic vom
alho and that means mouth of the whale
or mouth of the giant fish depending on
how you translate it but I prefer mouth
of the
whale. So a very interesting name there
and it's one of the sun's fairly near
neighbors just 25 light years away as
measured by our old friend the Hippoc
satellite. So 25 light years just next
door really. It's certainly within that
group of stars within the 30 or so light
years that surround the
sun. Physically, it's quite a hot star,
an
Aclass bluish white star with a
temperature of
8,590 Kelvin. So a lot hotter than the
sun. Nearly double the mass, 1.92 m
soul, and nearly double the radius, 1.8
8 * the radius. But that greater surface
area that comes from the formula p<unk>
r 2 so 1.8 squared and the higher
temperature as well results in the power
output being 16 times as great as that
of soul. So it's radiating heat
ferociously and it's very young just 1
to 300 million years old. This is uh
positively uh brand new as regards
stars. But even though it has nearly
double the mass, that prodigious energy
output 16 times as fast as the sun but
only double the mass reduces the
lifetime by roughly a factor of 10. And
so it's going to live around about a
billion years only.
Now there is one rather curious thing
about this star which we don't really
have an explanation for which is that it
seems to be relatively low in what
astronomers love to call metals and
chemists call all the elements heavier
than helium. So carbon, nitrogen, all
those things.
Um rather curious that it's half as rich
in them. And we don't really understand
why that would be. Usually a young star
will pick up more of the heavy elements
if it was formed later when larger stars
in previous generations have scattered
material across the cosmos. But perhaps
this star was formed in the outer
reaches of the galaxy where that has not
yet occurred and has somehow ended up
near to the sun. We just don't
know. What we have found using infrared
observations is that it has a massive
dust disc around it. And this perhaps is
the most interesting part about this
particular star. This is predicted to be
the way in which stars form out of a
large cloud of rotating dust and gas
collapsing under gravity forming a deep
knot in the center that becomes the
star. And with the remains forming into
these rings that you see here. And this
is a real image here taken by the James
Webb Space Telescope showing the
protolanetary disc as we call it and
showing that there are perhaps knots
occurring in the disc in the within
these ring features that will go on to
form planets as gravity does its work
and pulls things together.
Now this is a slightly earlier image of
that dusk disc. The black region in the
center is blotted out. This is a
coronagraph picture. So a metal
obscuring disc was held into the center
to obscure the main star and reveal the
disc. Some say it looks like the eye of
Sauron from the Lord of the Rings. But
uh inside the
disc, a small knot of high temperature
matter was detected back in 2004 and
seen to have moved by
2006. And this was felt to be a young
planet forming in the dust
discontrolling the rest of the matter
around it with its gravity. And this was
given the designation formalt B. Now we
always start with lowercase letters for
planets and we start with B. I don't
know why we start with A really but
there you go. So former hole B was
hypothesized and an orbit was suggested
quite an elliptical orbit actually
spanning through the dust disc was
suggested by some people and so
confident was everybody that in 2015 it
the international astronomical union
gave it the name Dagon.
Now, unfortunately for former Halt B,
later observations came along and as we
watched this bright speck of matter
moving around the disc, it seemed to get
bigger and dimmer. And the conclusion is
that former Halt B is not in fact a
planet, but this was the destruction of
a planet. It's the expanding debris from
a massive collision between two baby
planets, planetes, planettoids, whatever
you want to call them. And these were
colliding together in the disc, showing
how chaotic the planetary formation
process can be. And we know that from
the study of uh meteorites and asteroids
in our own solar system. And they indeed
the formation of the earth and so forth
are all um sorry the formation of the
moon around the earth all results of uh
violent protolanetary collisions.
So, we don't yet know that there are any
real planets around former halt, but it
seems likely that better studies will
discover all sorts of new features
within this dust ring
system. Now, it turns out that not only
have we got the dust ring and the
potential for planets around the main
star, former Halt A, but it has a pair
of companions, former B and C. And on
this star map, you can actually see them
well separated. Former Hulk being so
close to us, the companion stars are
spread over an area of sky of 8°. You
can see B marked just below the main
star there. And C towards the top of the
diagram. Now, C is actually in the next
constellation. It's straight over the
border. Um, and uh we'll see a star map
with that on in a moment.
So what do we know about these stars?
Well, the B star also got given a
designation of
TWWPC's
Australani and this is a K type. So an
orange dwarf star main sequence burning
hydrogen little bit smaller than the sun
at 73% of the mass and it's nearly a
lightyear away from the main A star.
That's a very wide orbit indeed. So
something like 50,000 astronomical
units. And it too has been identified as
having a planet. There is a Jupiterized
planet probably. It's not quite been
confirmed in a 25 year long orbit around
the B
star. You see it ringed on the map
there. The C star is actually crossing
into the constellation of Aquarius. It's
just over the border. So, uh, quite a
surprise really. And has a different
designation of LP
876-10. It's almost 5° away from the A
star. And this is a red dwarf, just 18%
the mass of our sun. So much much
fainter, much lower power output,
relatively hard to spot. And it orbits
the A star at a distance of 2 and a half
light years. uh taking 20 million years
to do it. That's uh quite an incredible
long orbit. And you might ask, how can
something be orbiting at 2 1/2 light
years away um and still be attached?
Well, it turns out this is because
former halt is relatively on its own in
space. And with that uh double solar
mass, 1.9 times the mass of our sun or
so, it has what's called a hill sphere,
a region of gravitational dominance
around it, where actually 2.5 lighty
years is well within the uh radius that
it will be the dominant uh object in
terms of gravity. That seems to span
about 6.2 light years for an object like
this. And I've got a diagram at the top
right here of the hill spheres around
the earth and the moon and the gravity
wells created by the masses of the two
bodies showing the principle that if
you're within the region of dominance of
the earth, well then you're pretty much
orbiting the earth. If you get close
enough to the moon and you have to get
quite close, then the moon can become
the dominant object. And so spacecraft
can happily orbit the moon largely
unaffected by the uh gravity of the more
distant earth. And this is called the
sphere of influence of those planets or
the hill sphere. And you have a formula
for the radius which is the distance
between them. a time the cube root of
the mass ratio where the mass ratio is
the mass of the small body divided by
three times the sum of the masses and
you can prove that I won't go into the
mathematics here but it allows us to
calculate the hill sphere for something
like former hold at around this 6.2 two
light years. So B and C well
captured. Also around the sea star there
is a dust disc. So not only does the A
star have the dust disc we've already
seen, but this too has quite a potent
dust disc around it going from somewhere
for between 20 and 80 astronomical
units. And it looks like this might be
stuffed full of comets, asteroids, and
planets. Um, no specifics to report on
that at the moment, but watch this
space. There might be data
coming.
And Formah is also not alone in its
journey around the galaxy. At least
probably. We think it is part of the
Caster moving group. And we have a plot
here of the lateral and uh vertical
motions of a group of stars um over a
dozen of them which are all moving
around the galaxy in the same manner and
seem possibly to have similar chemical
compositions
um suggesting that they were all born
out of a cluster. And so we've got such
famous stars as Vega, Caster, Alderman,
and Former Halt within that, plus a
number of
others. But the latest information on
that one is that maybe it's not quite
true. More accurate observations of each
of these stars seem to suggest that the
age doesn't quite agree with that uh
common origin idea. um the motion around
the galaxy. Well, they may have been
deflected, but if they age is wrong,
they can't have been born in a cluster.
So, thanks very much for listening. That
was once around formal.